[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you're like me, many
of you have been following
the evolution of Gregg Braden's
work for the last two decades.
As he scours the
globe and reaches
into both obvious and obscure
scientific data, as well
as indigenous wisdom,
his story broadens.
In his newest book, Deep Truth,
Gregg ventures into areas
that are very threatening to
the established scientific
community.
Namely, that modern
civilization is
far older than is
taught in our schools,
that the behavior
of people is not
the primary factor
in global warming,
and that nature is hardwired for
peace, not competition and war.
Once again, Gregg
enthusiastically
shares his vision of where
humanity is headed in this,
our latest conversation.
Gregg, fabulous to
see you, as always.
>> It is really good to see you.
I'm absolutely
thrilled to be here.
This year, this is 2012.
>> Yes.
>> We're in the first six
weeks, the first seven weeks
of the year 2012,
with our audience.
This is the first time I've
been with you this year.
We have a brand-new
book, brand-new material.
I've got so much
I'd love to share.
>> Deep Truth.
>> You want to share
some deep truths,
and that's the
title of the book.
And why?
>> Well, it is the title.
You know, one of the first
questions that people ask,
or one of the first
things I learned
when I released the
book and people asked--
in October of 2011, that's
when the book was released,
one of the first
things I learned
is that truth means different
things to different people.
Truth is a bit of
a charged word.
Some people thought it was
presumptuous of me to write
a book entitled Deep Truth.
You know, how can I
say this is the truth?
So I'd like to begin,
if we could, just
share a little bit
with our listeners
about where that
title even came from.
This book was unique for me in
that I generally choose a title
and then write the book
directed toward the title.
This book was almost
complete before I
knew what the title would be.
I didn't know exactly
what the title
was going to be for this book.
And it was in a
bibliographical research piece,
bibliography of Niels Bohr--
20th century physicist,
colleague, and friend of Albert
Einstein-- that I discovered
the title of the book.
The two of them were
having a conversation,
in the mid-20th century,
about the nature of truth.
And in this case,
their conversation,
it was scientific truth.
And this was 1940s.
It was like every week,
a new research paper
was being published
redefining what
we thought we knew about
the world of physics
and the laws of nature.
And it was the comment
that Niels Bohr made
to Albert Einstein that it just
resonated with me so quickly,
and I'm just going to share.
It's a direct quote.
Niels Bohr said, "It is the
hallmark of any deep truth
that its negation is
also a deep truth."
End of quote.
And I thought about that.
And at first, I
thought, how profound.
So what he was saying is
when new discoveries overturn
the discoveries that we used
to think describe the deepest
truths of our existence, then
the new discoveries themselves
become the new deep truths.
I said, that is precisely
where we find ourselves
in the world today.
That's the title of my
new book, Deep Truth.
>> And you go for every one
of these issues that are being
overturned as we speak.
>> Well, there are so many
new discoveries that--
peer-reviewed
scientific discoveries.
The book is not
based on speculation.
It's not Gregg-ism
or my opinions
or new thoughts or new age.
It is based upon
peer-reviewed scientific fact.
And I did that
intentionally, Regina,
because I wanted this book
to represent the deepest
truth of what we now understand
about our relationship
to ourselves and the world.
And we have an audience
that I call the choir.
And I love the choir,
because the choir
has supported me, my work,
for almost 30 years now.
We're coming up on 30 years
that I've shared this work
in one form or another.
And have really worked
from a grassroots level
to help us get the
work out there.
But what I know is this-- where
we find ourselves in the world
today, while the grassroots
comes from the bottom up,
we must work within the existing
power structures from the top
down if we are truly going to
bring about the kind of change,
the degree, the
magnitude of change
that we're all talking about
in a very brief period of time.
We must work within
existing power structures
rather than trying
to do an end run
or circumvent those
power structures.
And the only way to do
that in the Western world
is to share the discoveries
in a language that
is respected and trusted.
And in the West, that language
is the language of science.
If I were to go into an
indigenous-- and I've
done this.
When I go into the monasteries
of Tibet and to Egypt,
for example, and I talk
to the monks or the nuns
about new scientific
discoveries,
the first thing
they do is giggle,
because it's
unimportant to them.
Who needs the discoveries?
They live the principles.
But in the Western world,
because our choices
are impacting the whole world--
very, very few
places in the world
that the choices that we're
making now of how we deal,
adapt to climate change or
confront climate change, how
we deal with new diseases,
how we deal with the inability
to grow the food to support
the global populations,
disappearing of fresh water,
the disparity between wealth
and poverty, the
growing disparity,
the growing disparity between
illiteracy and education--
these are just the tip of the
iceberg of the kinds of crises
the best minds of
our time tell us
that we are facing right now.
They say it's not
our imagination,
that this generation,
this time in history,
we are, in fact,
facing the greatest
number and the greatest
magnitude of crises
ever to face a single
generation in 5,000 years
of recorded human history.
And they're telling
us that we've
got, in some cases, less than
two years, less than 24 months,
to change the way we think to
address some of the crises.
And even less than that when
it comes to the big war that's
looming over the Middle East.
I think we all sense that.
Or when it comes to the collapse
of a global economic system.
We have less than two years
to figure those things out.
The same people that
tell us of the crises
are telling us that they exist
because of a way of thinking,
that the crises are
the out-picturing
of a way of thinking
and a way of living
that's led to those crises.
So if we try to solve them
through the same thinking that
created them, we know
where that's going to lead.
So the book describes
new discoveries.
The good news is that
there are a series
of new scientific
discoveries that
overturn the deepest truths
that we held of our past.
The new discoveries now
become the new deep truths.
That's the good news.
The flip side is that there is
a reluctance and, in some cases,
an outright resistance
to share this information
in the mainstream.
What I mean by that
is mainstream media,
mainstream documentaries,
mainstream television,
mainstream classrooms,
mainstream textbooks.
A reluctance, in some cases
an outright resistance--
and I'm going to be very
clear with our listeners here.
When I talk about the classroom,
it's not the teacher's fault.
In the United
States of America--
because I know people view
this beyond our borders.
But in the United
States of America,
every teacher is bound by a
covenant within the specific
state where they teach that
determines what can and cannot
be shared publicly in the
classroom if it's a publicly
funded classroom.
And every state is
a little different,
and some of the states,
there are common themes,
such as the teaching of what can
and cannot be shared regarding
human evolution is one of
the places where this--
or climate change,
this comes up a lot.
So the good news is that new
discoveries have shown us
where the thinking
of the past can
be revised to reflect a deeper
reality, a deeper truth.
The flip side is that
mainstream's not getting that.
So I chose five of
those principles
that I call false assumptions
of science, five that I think
have had perhaps
the greatest impact
on our lives and
our world today,
and I described those five
in the new book Deep Truth,
subtitle Igniting the Memory of
our Origin, History, Destiny,
and Fate.
>> And in this book, I mean,
you're talking about all
the most essential
issues to humanity.
You're talking about the
sustainability of our host,
our mother, the Earth itself.
But you're also talking
about the species,
to reflecting on ourselves
in a different way now.
>> Sure.
>> Darwinian theory of
evolution isn't working anymore.
>> Darwin's part of it.
The key for me of the many new
discoveries that have been made
and are made-- peer-reviewed
scientific discoveries that
completely changed the way
we've been led to think about
our relationship to our
bodies, our relationship
to the physical world, our
relationship to the Earth,
our relationship to
history, to the past,
civilizations the past,
of the many discoveries--
I chose five that I think are,
perhaps, having the greatest
impact on the crises
that we have today.
And the thinking that can make
the greatest amount of change
in the least amount of time
regarding those crises.
So what it really boiled down
to, Regina, was simply this--
the best minds of our
time are telling us,
in no uncertain
terms, that we're
facing the greatest crises
of our very existence,
our survival.
They're telling us to act.
They're saying, you've
got to do something.
We've got to act quickly.
So my question is this, how?
How can we possibly make
the greatest choices
of our future and our survival
until we answer the deepest
truths of our existence?
And the reason for that--
I'm just going
invite our listeners.
If you've never
thought about this,
I'm going to invite you just to
think about this for a moment.
The way we answer
a single question
is at the root of every
choice that we're ever
going to make in our lives.
It's the core of every
decision that we will ever
make as individuals,
in our personal lives,
collectively, globally.
It's every crisis
that we've ever faced,
the way we address the crisis.
As different as those things
sound from one another,
the way we answer
a single question
determines how we
approach those answers.
And the question is simply this.
For an individual, we ask
the question, who am I?
For a civilization, for
a planet, who are we?
>> Right.
>> In the Western world, those
answers largely have been
offered and, consciously
or subconsciously,
we have embraced the teachings
of science for the last 150
years.
We may not consciously
know that's what we say.
It's just we repeat
the stories so often
about where people come
from and how we got here
and how old civilization is
and climate change and all
those things.
So what I began to
understand was just that,
that the deepest
truths, what we believe
to be the deepest truths,
are the result of what
someone else has told us.
The scientific community
and the new discoveries
are telling us a lot
of what's taught today
is simply no longer scientific.
It's not true.
>> Right.
>> And because of the reluctance
to share new discoveries,
what we're teaching in our
classroom is, by definition,
no longer science.
So we have a whole
generation of young people
that are about to dedicate
their entire lives to solving
some of the deepest
mysteries of human existence.
And they're being required
to answer those questions
within the boundaries, the
context, of what we now
know is false science.
They're not being given
the full toolbox to do it.
So that would be
important any time.
It's really important
now because of where
we find ourselves in the
history of our world.
So this is the context.
We are, in fact, facing the--
>> I have a question--
>> --greatest number and
magnitude of crises ever
to face recorded human history.
>> Absolutely, and this refusal
to budge within the scientific
and academic communities
to allow a little new light
and information to shine on in,
obviously, there comes a point,
and we talked about
this last time,
where people of the planet are
going to have to say, look,
I'm going to choose
another kind of authority.
my own authority,
my own understanding,
my instincts.
And I will weave
in the information
I choose to, because
the authorities aren't
leveling with us anymore.
A lot of the young
people feel it.
They get it.
They know it.
>> They do, and what
you're saying is true.
And I'm even amazed,
knowing what I know,
how deeply ingrained, in
the unconscious level,
many of these principles are.
So maybe the best
thing to do here, let's
identify five principles,
zero in on a couple that
are having the greatest
impact, and that
will give a perfect example.
People say to me, you know,
Gregg, what you're saying
might be true.
Why is it important?
What difference could it
possibly make in our lives?
And if we do this, it
might answer that question.
>> Let's go for it.
>> Are you OK if
we do it that way?
>> We can go from the top to
the bottom or bottom to the top.
Because you know your
material better than anybody,
which of the five deep truths
would you like to start with?
>> Let me identify the truths,
and then I'm going to zero in.
The last one, identify,
would be the first one
that I'll talk about.
>> That's the one I
would choose, too,
so let's go for it.
>> So there are many false
assumptions of science.
I've chosen five for the book.
So let me just share
with our listeners
the five false
assumptions that are still
being taught as fact in
classrooms and textbooks today.
The first one is a
Darwinian assumption
of the nature of our existence.
It's being taught
in the classroom
that evolution explains life
in general and human life
specifically.
The problem is that
the data no longer
supports that idea, that
theory, on the one hand.
On the other hand,
if there is even
a mention of alternative
or competing theories,
there are teachers in
the United States--
elementary, middle school,
and college professors
are losing their jobs
because they even
mention the fact that there
may be alternative theories.
And the thinking is the
alternative theories revolve
around religion, and that's
where the problem comes in.
>> Yes.
>> It's not about religion.
>> Deep problem.
>> Big problem.
So this is deep truth.
Or the false
assumption, number one,
is that evolution explains life,
evolution explains human life.
False assumption number
two is about how long we've
been here in civilization.
When I was in school,
when you were in school,
most of our-- let's
see, how old are we?
We're all within 50 years
of one another, right?
>> Oh, I think so.
Probably just a couple.
>> We're all about the same age,
within 50 years one another.
When I was in school back
in the '60s and '70s, most
of our viewers, and if you
have children in school today,
we're being taught that
civilization is about 5,000
years old, that it began--
advanced civilization.
That civilization
as we know it began
in the area of ancient
Mesopotamia, Sumeria,
and that it's a one-time deal.
It's linear.
It's developed from primitive
to the sophistication
of what we see today.
The problem is, the
data doesn't support it.
The data, peer-reviewed
scientific discoveries
published in relatively
obscure journals,
are telling us very
clearly that civilization,
advanced civilization,
is at least--
at least-- twice as old as
what we've been led to believe.
And the implications for that
will be clear in just a moment.
That's number two.
Number three regards physics.
We're being taught that
consciousness is somehow
separate from our
physical world.
The problem is the
new discoveries,
supported by brilliant
minds such as Professor John
Wheeler, Princeton University,
a colleague of Einstein--
I think he died in 2008--
are very clearly telling us
that the reason we've not
been able to unify
the field of physics
is because consciousness was
written out of the equations.
And when we put
consciousness back
in, the stuff that underlies
all physical existence, then
all of a sudden, the
equations begin to work.
So number three, we're being
taught that consciousness is
separate from physical matter.
Number four is related
to number three
in that the space between
physical things is empty.
We now know there is no
empty space in the universe.
There is a form of energy
that exists everywhere.
However, it is a
form of energy that
doesn't behave the way
we have expected energy
to behave in the
past, which means
that the equipment that we've
used to look for the energy
didn't see it.
Because the equipment is
designed to look for things
like magnetic fields
and electrical fields.
This energy doesn't
work that way.
So we know there
is no empty space.
That's number four.
And number five
is the last, but I
think it may be one
of the most critical,
is another Darwinian assumption.
Charles Darwin said, in 1859,
from his personal observations,
he said that nature is
built upon a model--
and I'm going to
use his language--
that he called survival of
the strongest it was later
interpreted as survival
of the fittest.
And the problem is that
the data absolutely
does not support that.
So I'm going to begin there.
Are you OK?
Can I zero in on that one first,
and it'll actually lead us--
>> There's where I'd
like you to begin.
Yes, please.
>> --into some others.
People have said to me, in
audiences all over the world--
I released this book
in October of 2011.
I shared the information
in other countries
long before the
book was released.
And people said, well, Gregg,
OK, we get what you're saying.
New discoveries are important.
Probably we should
talk about it,
but what difference
does it make now?
Darwin introduced
that stuff in 1859.
Here we are in 2011, 2012.
Why is it important?
And so this is why, just a
little bit of background here.
1859, Charles Darwin wrote
or published his first book.
It was titled On the
Origin of Species
by Means of Natural Selection.
It was based on research
that he'd done in the 1830s.
Now, the reason
this is important
is because before his
book was published,
the big questions of life were
answered largely by the church,
by the Catholic Church,
religious communities,
spiritual communities.
So Charles Darwin was
the first scientist
that took a stab at
scientifically addressing
our relationship to
the world and answering
the big question who are we.
And I want to be clear on this.
I was trained as a scientist.
I think science is good.
I believe in the
scientific method.
I think our lives are certainly
better because of science,
in some respects.
Science does not
have all the answers.
Science is a young language.
It's a young way of looking
and thinking of our world.
It's only about 300 years old.
So I think Darwin was probably
a pretty good scientist.
In my opinion, here's
where he made his mistake.
Here's where Darwin went wrong.
Charles Darwin took
observations that he
made for some forms of life
in some parts of the world,
and he tried to apply them
to all life everywhere,
including human life.
And the data simply
doesn't support it.
So here's what I mean by that.
He would go into nature,
and he would see examples
of birds, two siblings--
same species.
They were siblings in
a nest, young birds.
Another bird of another species
would come into that nest,
and the two that were there
originally would immediately
eject the bird from the nest
because it was different.
Or he saw colonies
of larger ants
capturing smaller
colonies of ants
and making slaves out of them.
They didn't kill them.
They enslaved them to
do their work for them.
Darwin, in his way
of thinking, he
believed that when
he saw these things,
little examples in nature.
He believed they were
small expressions
of a general law that
applies to everybody,
and we've heard this law before.
The law is multiply,
vary, let the strongest
live and the weakest die.
Let the strongest live
and the weakest die.
It's a very, very
dangerous way of thinking.
1859.
Because it was the
first scientific attempt
to describe our
relationship to the world,
his idea was embraced quickly
without a lot of investigation.
People just accepted
it as science,
so it was embraced quickly.
It became very deeply entrenched
in the emerging modern world.
And Regina, it's so much
a part of our lives today.
Every one of us, our
listeners, no matter
how conscious we believe
we are and how much
work we've done with ourselves,
subconsciously, this idea
is so ingrained
into the way that we
have been taught to live,
to think, the systems
that we've grown to
rely upon for our lives.
We've been taught that
it's a dog-eat-dog world,
that if we don't go
out there and fight,
the world's going to
just roll right over us.
Corporations are
based on this idea
of survival of the strongest.
The global economy,
that's collapsing
as we have this
conversation right now,
it is based on survival
of the strongest.
And the way we solve many of our
problems in the 20th century,
a time that historians tell
us was the bloodiest century
in all of recorded human
history, is based on this idea
that there's a pie,
one pie, and that we've
got to fight for the
biggest slice of that pie.
The problem with all of this is
the new discoveries very, very
clearly are telling us that
while competition does happen
in some circumstances,
and we've all seen it,
it's not the rule that
nature is based upon.
Over 400 peer-reviewed
studies were
done late 1990s, early
2000s asking one question,
and they all came up
with the same answer.
The question is, what is the
optimum amount of competition
in any environment?
Now, these are
scientists that rarely
use broad, sweeping
statements, but they do.
And what the
scientific paper said,
the optimum amount
of competition in any
environment-- in the
classroom, in the workplace,
on the playing field--
is zero.
That competition always,
always, always is destructive.
It's detrimental to the
individual and the community.
Cooperation and
mutual aid is the rule
that nature is based upon.
Very prestigious journals like
New Scientist, April 2008--
Michael Le Page wrote
a beautiful article.
And what he said, and I'll
quote this as best I can,
he said, what we
see in nature is not
every animal out for itself.
We see cooperation, he said,
is an incredibly successful
strategy for survival.
When cooperation breaks down,
the results can be disastrous.
That's the end of the
quote, so I remembered it.
>> And now, you and Bruce
Lipton have done a lot of work
together.
>> Yeah, well he's my
dear friend, brother.
We traveled through Europe
in a train together.
>> That's right.
You're brothers.
You love each other.
>> Yeah.
>> And I'm just looking
at that from that lens,
which is going down
to a cellular level,
imagine what would happen
if we applied that theory
on a cellular level
in the human body.
>> You're about four
sentences-- you're a woman ahead
of your time.
You're four sentences
ahead of me.
>> OK.
>> Because what people
say is, what do you mean
by cooperation?
Here's a perfect example.
Anyone watching this, we think
that we're individual bodies,
and Bruce tells us--
my dear brother,
Bruce Lipton, tells us
in his book, The
Biology of Belief,
that our body is not
really an individual,
that we're a community of
about 50 trillion cells.
And the community
is only possible
because of the cooperation of
those cells working together.
When the cells no
longer work together
is what we call illness,
disease, and death.
So at the most fundamental
level of the lives of all
of our viewers, we have a
personal first-hand experience
of how important cooperation
is in our lives, in the world.
I'm going to make
a distinction here.
So people say what
about capitalism
and the role of cooperation
in capitalism or competition
in capitalism?
The kind of competition that
Darwin was talking about
and that we're
talking about here,
it's not like a friendly game
of chess or a game of baseball.
This is violent competition.
I'm going to make a distinction.
Especially in the
classroom, we're
taught that competition is
good for our young people.
Well, it may be.
It depends on how
it's implemented.
What happens more often
than not in our classroom
is young people
are taught to get
the right answer on the test
any way they can, at any cost.
Or to score the point on the
playing field any way they can.
So it's less about their
personal excellence
and more about exploiting the
weakness of the other person.
This is a subtle and it's
a powerful difference.
When competition is about
exploiting and capitalizing
on the weakness
of another, that's
different than
competition based on us
being the best that we can,
doing the best job we can,
creating the best
product that we can.
It's subtle--
>> Thank you for making
that distinction.
>> --but it's powerful.
>> It's very important.
>> It is.
It's a very powerful
distinction.
>> We're watching what's
happening economically
as a result of that mindset.
>> OK, so people say, what
impact could that possibly have
on the world?
Now we're going to go
back to the context.
I mean, this would be
important at any time.
It's really important now
because of the context.
We're living a time
of the greatest
crises of 5,000 years of
recorded human history, when
the best minds of
our time tell us
we've got to think
differently quickly
or nothing else is
going to matter.
One of the fundamental
differences, our civilization,
our business model,
our economic model
is based upon survival
of the strongest.
And if we want to see
where the consequences
of a false assumption
can lead, we
need look no further
than the crises
that are facing us today.
There's a huge war looming
over the Middle East right now.
A lot of people
pushing for that war,
because they believe that
war's good for the economy.
So that's--
>> It's just such a
sick, sick mindset.
>> It's a way of thinking,
because it worked in the 20th
century in some people's minds.
>> I know.
>> Corporations are not based
on what's good for people.
They're based on what's
good for the corporation,
for the bottom line,
for the dollar.
It's a personal story.
I experienced this
in the 1970s myself.
I worked, I was a
computer geologist
for Philips Petroleum back
in the 1970s energy crisis.
It was a healthy company at
that time, very diversified.
And I personally
witnessed this idea
of survival of
the strongest when
an individual with
a lot of money
came in and attempted
to buy Philips.
A healthy, strong company.
Employed a lot of people.
Did a lot of good
things in the world.
Not just oil and gas, but they
were minerals and plastics
and all kinds of things,
domestically, foreignly,
or foreign soil.
This person came in.
It was called a corporate raider
was the term that was used.
And tried to take his
personal money to buy Philips,
break it into smaller
segments, smaller companies
that could be sold off at
a profit to the investors.
Put a lot of people out of work.
Destroyed a healthy company,
a family-owned company.
Been around almost 100 years.
It was a really
nasty thing to see,
based on the survival
of the strongest.
Philips was able to fight him
off by selling off so much
of their company there
wasn't much left,
and it was never the
same company again.
They sold off their minerals.
They sold off their
North Sea oil platforms.
plastics division.
But it was about this idea
of survival of the strongest.
>> It's like vultures.
>> It was at that time, and
it's the result of a way
of thinking.
So here we are, right now, the
early years, the 21st century.
We are living the last year
of a rare and mysterious cycle
of time, a 5,125-year-long cycle
our ancestors called the Great
World Age.
They knew that the cycle was
coming, because it always does,
every 5,125 years, because
Earth's location in space
changes on a rhythmic basis.
That location, they
knew, would change
the way we live on Earth,
the way we live in our lives.
Earth's location as
it changes in space,
it changes the climate.
It changes the weather patterns.
It changes the way we're
able to grow our food,
the way we're able
to share resources.
It happens every 5,000 years.
And that change is what triggers
within us the ways of dealing
with problems, and it tells us
what works and what doesn't.
Our thinking of competition
and survival of the strongest,
if we try to address
this great change
through that way
of thinking, we're
already seeing where it leads.
Because it's leading to the
collapse of ways of life
that we have grown to
cherish in the past.
So it's an opportunity to
change that way of thinking.
And the new discoveries give
us a good reason to do so,
except they're not being
shared on a public--
>> No, they're not.
And here, at the same time--
>> --mainstream level.
>> --as all of
this is happening,
the squeeze is happening, and
the fittest here economically--
who aren't doing so well,
by the way, right now.
A handful of people have
made out all right on this.
But what's happened?
It's come at the expense of
virtually everything else.
What has happened to the poet,
to the artist, to the musician?
When you start looking
into the things that
make life an expression, that's
the first thing squeezed out
in favor of the most
functional types of positions
that only serve that machine.
And so we're at that point now.
>> We are.
>> And again, I think this
ties back into what you're--
you know Michael Cremo, as
well, Forbidden Archeology.
>> I know him very well.
I just shared a panel with him.
>> Yes, you did.
>> And I spent a week with him
in 1996 in Boulder, Colorado,
at a closed-door conference.
He's a brilliant
man, amazing man.
>> He's a brilliant
man, and one of the--
>> And a brother.
He's another of your brothers.
And I've interviewed
your brother.
I think he's a he's
an incredible man.
And what he's
saying about this--
because it's going to take
you back into the theory
of evolution and back into what
we are, what has inspired us--
is that the theory of
evolution has become
institutionalized because it
actually serves another larger
kind of agenda.
>> It's habit.
>> There's a lot of money
invested in supporting that
story.
>> Oh, you bet.
And it also keeps people limited
in our perceptions of self
and our own capabilities.
And that's not helping things.
>> It can, but this is where
I think we have an opportunity
to really rethink the way
we think about ourselves
and our relationship
to the Earth.
A lot of people out there
saying we made a lot of mistakes
and really screwed things up.
I don't believe that at all.
What I believe is this.
I think we're in a
huge learning curve.
And I think the choices
that we made as individuals
and as a civilization
in the past
have been based on what
we knew at the time.
And we made choices
based on what we knew.
And I think that's all
we can ask of ourselves.
Now we have the opportunity
to make new choices,
and new information is
out there to inform us.
And where the problem comes in
is when that information is not
shared.
Evolution is one example.
So now, let's go back.
I've just shared-- now, this
is one deep truth, number five,
that nature is based upon
survival of the strongest.
We now know that's
a false assumption.
It's based on mutual
aid and cooperation.
While competition can happen in
response to certain situations,
it's not the rule of nature.
Now, I'm to pop up
to deep truth number
two about civilization itself.
This is where it gets
really interesting,
and context so important.
We're taught that 5,000 years
is the age of civilization.
It's a one-time deal.
And I remember studying
my history books.
And here's like 5,000 years
ago was Ancient Sumeria.
Egypt is more recent
and Rome and Greece.
All things I thought
were so ancient,
they're actually more recent.
And I remember asking
our professors,
what happened before that?
And they said it's
like nothing was going.
On Nobody here,
nothing was happening.
The archaeological evidence
doesn't support that at all.
Peer-reviewed archaeological
evidence-- now,
I've had the opportunity
to personally document some
of these sites myself--
are now pushing the age
of advanced civilization
back into the last ice age,
the end of the last ice age.
Now, as a former geologist,
what I can say to our listeners
is the ice age ended
about 12,000 years ago.
After that, there
was 4,000 years
of what's called a bad storm.
Really bad storm.
It lasted 4,000 years.
And it's at the
end of the ice age
and during the bad storm
when the temperatures rose.
There was a lot of rain.
The ice melted.
The sea levels rose.
That's when this last cycle
of civilization formed.
So now, we have places--
the oldest site right now
is called Gobekli Tepe.
It's in Turkey.
Archaeologists have
not even excavated
to the bottom of the site, and
they're already dating this now
at 13,500 years old.
That's over twice as
old as what we've been
led to believe in the past.
Other sites, Catal Hoyuk,
another site in Turkey,
8,000 to 9,000 years old.
Off the coast of India,
under 120 feet of water,
there is a site that is five
miles long, two miles wide.
It is under 120 feet of water.
I have to say, it's a sign that
one of two things happened.
Either the site was
built under water,
which could happen
but isn't likely,
or it was built near
the water, and when
the climate changed and the sea
levels rose, it was submerged.
>> So these are pre-ice
age in some cases?
>> These are all right at
the edge of the ice age.
The ice age is 12,000 years.
So some of these are
right back at-- they're
dating now 13,500,
right around in there.
But they haven't gotten to
the bottom of these yet.
>> Exactly.
>> I personally
documented northern Peru.
There's a site called Caral.
Caral, Peru.
We don't know who
built this site.
It's a 150-acre
site, five pyramids,
two huge circular plazas.
We don't know where
they came from.
We don't know where they went.
But here's the thing.
The day I was there is when the
laboratories-- the university
called my translator with
the dating for the site.
The day I was there is when
the dates were revealed.
We're taught that civilization
began 5,000 years ago.
That's when Caral ended.
It ended when we're
told that civilization
began and dates back at least
2,000 years older than that.
Excuse me.
And there are other sites.
But the reason I'm sharing
this, if it were one site,
it could be an anomaly.
Now what's happening
is the anomalies
are telling a new story, and
the story is simply this.
The 5,000 years that
we've been taught
is the history of the
whole world forever,
it's not the history of
the whole world forever.
It's the history of the most
recent 5,000-year cycle based
on Earth's alignment in space.
And before that, there was
another 5,000-year cycle that
almost universally indigenous
traditions refer to.
They call it the Golden
Age or the Age of Peace.
And there were
cycles before that.
>> Before that, yes.
>> I cannot say
that scientifically.
>> Scientifically, it
cannot be verified,
but it's been in the lore--
>> It has.
>> --of every indigenous culture
that they've gone on back
throughout.
>> At least four cycles,
each cycle 5,000 years long.
At least four of
those in the past.
We can scientifically
validate two of them.
As a geologist, we can
validate the characteristics
of the four cycles.
But here's why I'm
even sharing this.
This is where it gets
really interesting.
There is a through line
that links all of these
pre-5,000-year cycles
together, civilizations,
and it simply is this.
In every one of
those sites, there's
no evidence of any weapons.
There's no evidence
of large-scale war.
There are no walls surrounding
the homes or the cities
to protect them
as we find today.
There are no moats
surrounding them.
There are no mass
burials that you
would expect after large-scale
war, no mutilated bodies.
Now, that's true of the
Gulf of Khambhat in India.
That's true of the
sites in Egypt.
That's true of
the sites in Peru.
It's true of the
sites in Turkey,
as well as those through
the Ukraine and Europe
that we're finding.
One of two things is happening.
Either those things exist
and they haven't been found
or they're non-existent.
To me, if the
weapons were there,
if there were evidence
of large-scale war,
I think, in at
least one site, we
would have found some
shred of evidence.
And the fact that we have
not is leading historians
and archaeologists to rewrite
portions of the history books
in peer-reviewed articles.
It's not being shared
in our schools,
but what they're saying is this.
What they're saying
is it appears now
that war is not human nature,
that it's not our nature
to fight one another
and destroy one another.
That war appears to be a
habit, a very bad habit, that
began about 5,000 years ago.
Interestingly, during the time
that we say civilization began.
But before that time,
there's no evidence
of any large-scale war.
And it suggests that
if war is a habit that
was learned 5,000
years ago, then
it's a habit that
we can unlearn.
The crises of today may force
us to come to that realization,
because the purpose of
war is now obsolete.
The idea that there is someone
that is clearly a winner,
there's a loser, you know
when the war is over--
the wars we're looking at
today are not about borders.
They're about ideas.
>> And I think almost every
mother has always known war is
obsolete.
>> Yes, and it certainly is now.
So now, we put this into the
context of these deep truths,
and I'm not surprised that
we find no evidence of war,
because it is not in our
deepest nature, survival
of the strongest.
We are, essentially,
a cooperative species.
We can compete.
We can kill each other
and blow one another up,
we know that, under
certain conditions.
Where this gets really
even more interesting
is the researchers have found
three conditions, Regina,
they say, under
which we will betray
our truest nature of
cooperation and survival
or cooperation and mutual aid.
Three conditions.
If one or some combination of
these three conditions exist.
Number one, when we feel
personally threatened,
we can become violent.
Number two, when we feel that
our families are threatened.
Number three, when we feel that
our way of life is threatened.
You look at the hot
spots in the world
today, especially in the
Middle East and Africa,
and not only one of
those but, in many cases,
all three of those are present.
People feel their lives,
their way of life,
their families are being
threatened right now.
So I'm not saying it's
right, wrong, good, or bad.
I'm saying at some
point, ultimately,
if you really want to get
to the bottom of this,
we're going to have
to address those.
But I think it's
useful to know that--
to me, it feels different to
know that war and conflict is
not our truest nature.
There is a history
book that is used
as a textbook in many
mainstream classrooms today,
and the first page
of the history book
actually says, quote,
"War is like commerce.
It's something that
all humans do."
So they lead us to
believe that it's
as natural as night and day.
So we have a generation
of young people--
war looks very sexy on the
commercials on the television.
>> They're doing some
feature-length films on it that
are being released,
I think, in March.
>> I mean, I look them and I
think if I didn't know how it
was being used, that would
be cool a very cool thing.
High tech, very cool.
Young people are
being conditioned
to believe you've got
to go out and fight
for your piece of the pie.
And you start it
from the early age,
and you start it
in the classroom
with the kid next to you.
>> You start it on video
games with little kids.
>> They do.
They do.
So now, again, context.
Here we are, the last year
of a 5,125-year cycle.
Earth's position in
space has changed,
changes the
conditions that we've
learned to live with on Earth.
And it's forcing us now--
it's forcing our hand.
It's forcing us
to change the way
that we have lived
in the past, the way
that we solve our problems,
the way we grow our food,
the way we share our resources,
the way we share medicines.
The question is this, and
we're answering it right now,
will we choose cooperation
or competition?
I think it's a much
more basic question.
I think we're asking
will we choose love,
or will we choose fear?
I don't know the answer
to that, because we're
making the choice right now.
But I'm encouraged
by what I'm seeing.
I think we're going to get
very close to a big war
in the Middle East.
I don't think it's
going to happen.
I'm encouraged by what
I see behind the scenes.
I think the crises are
forcing us to work together
in ways that we've
never had to, personally
and on a global level,
because we need to now.
>> Yes.
>> I think what will happen
is when the crises subside,
because we now already
are working together,
we'll keep working together.
Because we'll find that
we're better people and we
have a better world.
And in that way, some of the
most beautiful prophecies
of our ancestors will be
fulfilled, of a new world where
people work together.
So I'm not saying that
we lose our culture
or our individuality.
I think we're always
going to have our culture,
our music, our food.
But I think on a global
level, people-- people ask me,
they asked me at
this conference,
are we moving toward
a global government?
And I say, how would you
know when it happens?
How would you define that?
We already have global commerce.
We're moving toward a
global financial system.
We've got 24/7 trading.
We've got global security.
We've got global trade
of global resources.
We're sharing global
medicines, deployment of troops
to help with global crises.
What would have
to happen for you
to say that we have or we
don't have a global government?
And so then the next
question is people say, well,
is it a good thing?
And I can't answer that.
I say, I don't know the
answer, because it's
all about how it
would be implemented.
If we'll learn, as a
planet, to share the things
that every human needs every day
of their lives to be healthy,
vital, thriving humans--
fresh water, clean food,
medicines, and the opportunity
to create a better life.
And that is shared
equally, but we still
retain our culture and our food
and our art and rock and roll
music and all that stuff,
it can be very cool.
If globalization is pushed
to a deeper level out
of greed and competition, it
could be a really ugly way
to go.
>> And Gregg, is there a
possibility that we're looking
at a potential for both kinds
of outcomes in some way?
Because you know the
polarization of thought
that's going on.
There are beautiful things
being given birth to.
>> There are.
>> A lot of people
that are shifting
in their consciousness.
Conversely, you
have, I don't know
if you would say, equal
proportions or not.
I don't know the percentages.
>> So, about equal proportions--
>> Others going the
other direction.
>> Here's I know, is this.
When I worked in the
defense industry,
I worked with NASA pretty
closely, and what I found--
listeners know this--
is when you launch
a rocket or a missile
from Earth and you
go to the moon or Mars,
an angle, a little shift
in the trajectory here on Earth
from where it leaves Earth--
by the time it
gets to where it's
going, that little shift
makes a huge difference.
>> Yes, indeed.
>> It's a beautiful analogy for
where we're going right now.
We are on a planetary trajectory
based on a way of thinking,
false assumptions of science.
Little shifts that we
make in our personal lives
translate into huge
changes in a relatively
short period of time.
And this idea of cooperation
versus competition, I
think it's the place to begin.
>> And looking at it from
a spiritual point of view
in overlay to this,
in the Isaiah Effect,
which I read when it came
out, and we've talked about--
>> You read my book.
Thank you.
>> Of course I've read--
I think I've read
all your books.
And with the Isaiah Effect,
we're looking at the notion
that a certain percentage
equals a tipping point.
But you were speaking
of a certain percentage
and tipping point of people who
are elevating their thinking
and their intention and
their understanding.
>> You know, in the old days--
and this was that
book was written,
the Isaiah Effect
was written, in 1998.
It was published in 2000.
It based on studies that were
done in the '80s and the '90s,
where the scientists
were thinking
in a linear fashion, that took
a certain number of people
that we would call
the hundredth monkey
idea to tip these scales.
Now, scientists are telling us
quantum understandings tell us
it's not about the
numbers of people,
but it's about the quality--
>> That's where
I was going next.
>> --of the experience that
relatively few people actually
have.
>> OK, so that was going
to be the extension.
You have this, and then
now, the quality of love,
the quality of--
I don't like hope as in a
term of something that's
to be aspired to, but genuine
feeling in your being,
in your cells, that we're on
the turn for the better, fueled
by love, is such a high
frequency that, in the end,
is this what you're saying,
that frequency essentially
will dominate?
>> What I think is
happening is this.
First of all, the world
that we've known in the past
is gone.
And for those who are
clinging to a way of life that
no longer exists and are
working to get back to that,
I think they're
the ones that are
having the greatest struggle,
the greatest suffering.
So the world of
the past is gone.
We cannot go back to it,
because it no longer exists.
We're moving
forward with change.
That is a fact.
Are we going to stop it?
Probably not.
That's a fact.
Can we direct the change?
I believe we can.
Can we soften the
impact of how that
change lands in our personal
and our collective lives?
The evidence suggests
that we can, strongly.
So let me just say this
briefly, and I don't know
how we're doing on
our time here, but--
>> We've got about 10.
>> OK.
Let me share a story.
I was in Australia over
9/11 and couldn't get back
in my own country.
Planes weren't flying.
And when they did, I came back,
and just a few days later, I
was actually in Paris,
France, right after 9/11.
And I was with an
audience of 3,500 people.
And there was one man in the
audience, a Frenchman, who
was very angry about something.
Security came in,
and they were going
to kick him out of the venue.
I believe there
are no accidents.
So I said, don't kick him out.
I said, if you want
to ask him to stand
in the hall for three minutes.
Ask him just to
wait in the hall.
And while he was gone
in those three minutes,
the 3,499 people now left
in the 3,500-seat audience,
we went through an exercise
creating what's called
coherence between the
heart and the brain.
It is scientifically
proven to be
the core of some of
our most spiritual
and ancient traditions.
It's about setting up
communication between the heart
and the brain of a very
low frequency, 0.10 hertz.
Heart-brain coherence.
It's very easy to do.
It's based on--
>> Heart Math works on this.
>> It's what we
do in our hearts,
and it's based on studies,
now scientifically proven,
through the Institute
of Heart Math.
I think Howard Martin--
I believe you've
interviewed Howard Martin.
>> No, we have not
gotten together yet.
>> OK, he's a dear brother,
colleague, and friend.
>> Please put in a word.
>> And the person that can make
that happen is in the room with
us now.
>> Is you.
Would you please?
>> We will.
>> I've done Heart--
I have done that.
>> He's here this week,
and I'd like for you,
if you can talk to him.
Here's the key.
Coherence is easy to achieve,
and it is measurable.
And when we establish
heart-brain coherence
based upon experiences
that are taught in some
are most cherished and ancient
spiritual traditions, what
we do is we set up a field.
We couple the magnetic
field of the human heart
with the magnetic
field of the Earth that
connects and sustains all life.
So it is a marriage
of us with this field.
So in this room, ballroom in
Paris, I invited the group
and shared with them
very simple instructions
to set up a coherent
field in the room.
And you can measure it.
We know it was actually there.
Then, we invited the
Frenchman to come back in,
gave him a microphone.
Through the translator,
because my French is terrible,
I asked him, I said, tell
us what your experience is.
What are you feeling?
And he had the strangest
look on his face.
And he said, through
the translator,
he said, in my mind,
I know why I'm angry.
He says, but I can't
feel the anger.
He couldn't access the emotion.
And I'm not surprised,
because in a coherent field,
the emotion of anger and
hate and jealousy and rage
that fuels competition,
that is no longer present.
You can think about it,
but you can't feel it.
The reason I'm sharing that
story is because what happened
in that room with
that man can happen
on a planet between nations.
It's really hard for
a leader of any nation
to declare war on their neighbor
when you're not feeling it.
You know, you can talk to
your Joint Chiefs of Staff,
and you can say, hey, guys,
I'm just not feeling it.
It's really hard to declare
a violent competition
of any kind.
And this, I think, is one of
the greatest hopes in our world
today, because there
is no them and us
when it comes to this field.
There's a we.
Every CEO of every corporation,
every leader of every nation,
every blade of grass, every
hamster, every goldfish,
every dog, every cat is
linked to this field.
The question is, what
do we-- because we're
linked to it every day,
what do we feed the field?
What do we have to nurture
and nourish this field with?
Now, this is where it gets
really tricky, Regina.
I'm being careful about this.
People ask me if I was
supporting the Occupy Movement
as it existed in the early days.
And I said to them,
very honestly,
the system is definitely broken.
We definitely need a new system.
I am all about, and will always
work for, positive change,
but you will never see me
fight against or protest
against something
for this very reason.
There's a field out there.
The field doesn't
know the specifics.
It gets the general
patterns of energy.
When we're protesting against
something, what we're doing
is causing a very incohesive
disruption in this field that
agitates and upsets people.
So I will work to create
a field of coherence
toward positive change.
I would never tear
down something
that is already existing,
because from my perspective,
my understanding and what
I know now to be true,
it actually defeats
the very purpose
and actually supports
the conditions
that we would like to change.
So I don't know if I
said that OK or not.
>> No, no, that was, to
me, that was perfectly put.
And that is at the crux of it.
Because we're all now having
to take in so much information,
evaluate, look at
what doesn't work.
And naturally, it attracts
anger in a lot of people--
>> I understand that.
>> --when you find
you've been deceived.
>> I understand that.
>> Your resources have
been misallocated.
People get upset about it.
But still, the temptation--
I know the temptation is there
to want to lash out and indulge
in these feelings.
It's not helping anything.
>> Now that we know the
relationships when we create
those kinds of emotions--
just, you can think
of it this way.
When the tsunami happened in
Japan or the nuclear meltdown
or the stock market
collapses, there
is a wave, a shockwave,
that goes through the field
of consciousness.
And we all feel that
in one way or another.
Coherence can offset
that a little bit
and maybe help even out
some of those rough edges.
When people are protesting
against something
that they don't
believe in, the field
doesn't make a distinction
between their beliefs and--
all the field knows is there is
an agitation from their protest
that's now being put
out into the field.
So this is where if we're really
conscious of our relationship
to the Earth and to one
another and if we really
understand these principles,
this is what's different now.
Relatively few people can
anchor a very powerful field
of coherence that smooths out
some of those rough edges.
And I think when it
comes down to making
those choices, somebody
sitting in a room
halfway around the
world saying, are we
going to go to war or not?
It's really hard
to go to war when,
in the field of
coherence, you're
feeling the desire for
peace and cooperation.
And this is what the
studies have shown.
In the presence of
coherence, we're
much less violent, much
more willing to cooperate,
much less warlike.
Plus, it's healthy for us.
It's good for us.
>> It's a personal choice.
>> It is.
Coherence, individual coherence.
It strengthens
our immune system.
Kicks those anti-aging
hormones in--
I'm 600 years old.
Don't look a day
over 500, right?
>> Wow.
Not a day over.
I'd have pegged you for 480.
>> Thank you.
It's good for us personally.
And now we're
understanding what is
good for us personally
extends beyond our bodies
and, collectively, is good
for our world, as well.
So I think as we bring
all-- and we've only
gone through a few
of the deep truths.
There's so much more, and I
know I have, as you can see,
a list that's filled here--
>> OK, so question number two.
>> --this entire page.
No, we don't--
>> I'm just kidding.
I'm just kidding.
>> We do not have time.
However, people that
are watching this
do have time to pick
up the book and then
go ahead and read the rest.
>> Thank you for that.
So I think the thing
that people ask me--
this is now 2012.
And our office was
inundated the first couple
of days of the year, Gregg
2012, what's your message?
What can you say?
And I think it all comes down,
there's a question that we all
ask ourselves every day, and a
little shift in this question,
I think, is the
key to everything
that we're talking about here.
The question is simply
this, how can we
make the shift from the
question what can I get
from the world that exists--
that's the question we've
been asking for a long time.
If we can shift from
that into asking,
what can I give to the
world that's emerging?
The way we answer that very
subtle question opens the door
to the possibilities of
career, jobs, opportunities,
cooperation that maybe we've
never even thought of before.
What can I give to the
world that's emerging,
rather than what can I
get from the world that's
already out there?
And I look forward to
exploring that answer with you,
with our listeners.
Come back in 2013, and
we'll talk about 2012, OK?
>> We seem to meet
each other once a year,
and thank you very much
for closing on that note.
I'm with you on that one 100%.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Thank you so much.
>> Thank you again, Gregg.
>> Thanks for having me here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> To take a deeper look
into Gregg's thoughts
on the subjects we've just
spoken of, you can pick up Deep
Truth.
Through any major bookseller.
Gregg is very clear that
we need to take a deep look
into our history and evolve
our thinking if we're
going to take this
species to an upgraded
level of societal functioning
and economic and environmental
harmony.
Until next time, thanks
for watching CMN.
[MUSIC PLAYING]